Subject: A Medscape Article on MDMA
Date: Sun, 26 Sep 1999 00:43:44 -0500
From: "Serotonin" <serotonin1@hushmail.com>
Organization: Deconstruction, Inc.
Newsgroups: alt.drugs.chemistry,alt.drugs.culture,rec.drugs.chemistry,rec.drugs.smart

I thought the following information may be of general interest:
The author, Jeffrey T. Kirchner, DO, Department of Family and Community
Medicine, Lancaster General Hospital, has compiled an *extensive* list of
references, including the Ricaurte studies and one citation of *somebody* by
the name of A. Shulgin :-)  (Shulgin AT. The background and chemistry of
MDMA. J Psychoactive Drugs 1986;18:291-304. ) If anybody would like the
whole list, let me know. (serotonin1 at hushmail.com)

History of MDMA
The first preparation and description of MDMA was through a patent issued by
the E. Merck Pharmaceutical firm in Darmstadt, Germany, in 1912. The drug
was developed as an appetite suppressant but never became commercially
successful. It resurfaced in the 1950s as a method of lowering inhibitions
in patients undergoing psychoanalysis.[1] Patients using the drug found it
gave them a sense of closeness with others around them. They believed it let
down barriers or filters to free communication and aided in the
introspective analysis of one's psyche. In 1983 a study performed on 29
volunteers (primarily academics and medical professionals), MDMA was found
to be an adjunct to insight-oriented psychotherapy and to facilitate
intimacy and communication between people involved in intimate
relationships.[2,3]
Despite some of these reported benefits of MDMA, in July 1985 the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) placed the drug into the schedule 1 category,
which greatly restricted its availability.[1] Since that time its use as an
adjunct to psychoanalytical therapy has greatly diminished, but its illicit
use has become more common, perhaps in response to all of the attention
given to MDMA by the lay press during the hearings that led to its schedule
1 classification.

Recreational use of MDMA began to surface in the early to mid 1980s. Reports
from Ireland and college campuses in the United States showed its use was
growing noticeably. Cases of ingestion reported by the Irish Poison
Information Center increased 130 percent from January 1991 to June 1992.[4]
Recreational use by college students surveyed at a private southern
university increased from 8 percent in 1986 to 24 percent in 1991.[5] In
addition, reports of adolescent knowledge of MDMA in England showed a
dramatic increase in awareness of MDMA in the past 5 years.[6]

Currently most MDMA use occurs during "raves" -- large (sometimes numbering
thousands of participants) dance parties held in abandoned warehouses or
other similar structures. Apart from techno-pop music and "smart drinks"
(drinks laced with amino acid mixtures), MDMA seems to be an integral
component of the rave scene.

Preparation of MDMA
At least six methods of making MDMA are described in the scientific
literature. Several recipes can be located easily on the World Wide Web.
Some specialized equipment is required as well as some expertise in organic
chemical synthesis. Most expert black-market manufacturers recommend 1 to 2
years of undergraduate chemistry experience, including organic and analytic
chemistry courses that have laboratory components. Problems with impure or
incorrect synthesis can result in some rather potent and toxic contaminants,
however, which could be the reason for toxic ingestions noted in the
literature.

Pharmacology
In vivo and in vitro animal studies have shown that MDMA affects the
serotonergic (and to a lesser extent dopaminergic) neurons of the brain. The
compound seems to cause a calcium-independent flood of serotonergic neuron
release into the synaptic cleft while inhibiting serotonin reuptake. This
response results in the euphoria and stimulus effect of MDMA.

Toxicology and Neurotoxicology
Concerns about MDMA have arisen as a result of studies showing both
reversible and possible irreversible damage to serotonergic neurons.[7-15]
These studies involved rats, rabbits, and nonhuman primates. Human studies
of the effect of MDMA, which have been limited to indirect analysis through
assays of cerebrospinal fluid obtained from patients, have shown conflicting
results. Some studies have found a reduction in serotonin metabolites in the
cerebrospinal fluid, suggesting a general depression or loss of serotonin
from the brain.[16] Another study showed no such loss of the serotonin
metabolites.[17] Because these studies were uncontrolled, the results are
difficult to interpret. Ongoing controlled trials in Europe, as well as
positron emission tomography (PET) scanning, could aid in further answering
the question of neurotoxicity in humans.[18]
The lethal dose (LD50) of MDMA has been studied in various animal models and
by various routes of administration. Studies in rats have shown an LD50 of
49 mg/kg (parenterally) and 325 mg/kg orally.[1] Nonhuman primate studies
have shown an LD50 of 22 mg/kg.[13] While no LD50 studies in humans have
been done, serum levels assayed on patients with toxic MDMA ingestions have
approached or in some cases exceeded the primate LD50 dose.

Recreational Use in Popular Culture

Information concerning the use and synthesis of MDMA is available through
the Internet. Many sites on the World Wide Web discuss dosage methods for
safe usage. These instructions are supported by literature from academics
who have spent time studying the effects of and analyzing MDMA.[1,2,43]
Their recommended dosage is 2 mg/kg as an initial dose with a booster dose
after 3 to 4 hours of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg. It is also recommended that the user
stay well-hydrated and refrain from vigorous physical activity to reduce the
risk of serious hyperthermia and dehydration. Another important safety tip
is having a trip guide to protect the user from risky behavior.[48] The
current street price of MDMA is $10 to $30 per dose. The drug can be
ingested orally, injected, smoked, or snorted. The onset of action is
directly related to the route of administration, and for an oral dose onset
usually occurs in 30 to 45 minutes.
Psychologic effects of MDMA include enactogenesis (touching within) or a
sensation that all is right with the world; empathogenesis, which is a
feeling of emotional closeness to others coupled with a breakdown of
personal communication barriers; and enhancement of the senses of touch,
taste, vision, smell, and proprioception. These effects last approximately 4
to 6 hours, but a noticeable decrease in effect occurs within 2 to 3 hours.

Known side effects of MDMA include trismus and bruxism for which gum chewing
is recommended. The drug is contraindicated in persons taking monoamine
oxidase inhibitors because it can cause malignant hyperthermic reactions.[1]
MDMA should also be avoided by persons who have a history of hypertension or
cardiac, peripheral vascular, or renal disease because of its propensity to
increase blood pressure.

Final Comment
Ecstasy, or MDMA, is a substance that has become popular with a subset of
today's young adults. It has been associated with numerous fatal outcomes
when used in improper situations or to excess. Because of the illicit nature
of its production, impurities and toxic by-products are an additional
hazard. The family physician should be aware that this drug, as well as many
other so-called designer drugs, are being used in the community. The
clinician should also be prepared to deal with the consequences of MDMA
ingestion in patients who have a constellation of symptoms described in the
patient above. Further research is needed (and currently underway) to define
better the pharmacologic effects of MDMA and determine whether it might be
of therapeutic benefit to the medical and psychiatric communities.
