Subject:      eff.of CAT inthe Amricn Spdfrk..pop-i

My anonymous Net Pal asked me to post this for information purposes only
                                                        -oLiveoiL
                        *standard disclaimer*
  This describes illegal activity, this is posted cross-eyed and double
blind anonymous, I could be making this up, I have already been publicly
denounced, don't try this in Tupperware...  I have hereby disclaimed, you
have been warned....be careful in realTime, keep your mouth shut.
  All responces involving ethical and/or moral pretences will be mutilated
for entertainment purposes and your addressing circulated amongst low-life
scooter-trash.
                          *disclaimer over*


            THE EFFECTS OF METHCATHINONE ON THE AMERICAN SPEEDFREAK
                           {based on a sample of 2}



 Crank synths are a bitch.  Dealing either direction with speedfreaks, as
much as I love 'em, can turn into a real twisted circus.  So when I got
wind of the  Methcathinone process it sounded like a real cake walk to
independent  self medication, the answer to my delusions.  Shit, this is so
easy, the chemicals so uncontrollable, it might as well be legal.  If you
get caught doing this, you've got a really big fucking mouth and need to
stay straight for everyone's benefit...It doesn't even stink the place up.

 I got there on the third try, which is good for a chemHacker. For details
(mostly what not to do) on chasing the CAT, see:

Newsgroup:alt.drugs.chemistry
  Subject: Re: methcathinone question,
                                         posted same date as this.

references: http://hyperreal.com/drugs/stimulants/cat.synth

        Unfortunately, it IS indeed too good to be true.  CAT is by no
means a Methamphetamine substitute, entirely different effects, the
subjective effects are far less potent but it is physiologically more
taxing, at least at first... It's easier for other people to tell you're
wired, not that it makes you a blithering, obnoxious bore; ala cocaine,
just sort of jumpy and nervous.
        Some trembling.  Speech becomes a bit spastic, short quick
bursts..... hunterThompsonesque.

          It does not induce alertness, or clarity on a level with good
Meth.  It will keep you up, but it doesn't clear your head. You can NOT
choose to relax, nor is it much of a motivator.  The Erotic ( kudos
Shulgin)  is unaffected...Big difference there...might even be a bit
inhibiting.

        Compared to Crank, there is a low ceiling on the insomnia effect.
It will not take you to the psychotic abyss of sleep deprivation, even with
huge, repeated doses. Of course, this is not most people's idea of a good
time anyway.  I'm just funny that way.

        I got mostly oil, which I dissolved in water and drank...tastes
like soggy cardboard smells...it comes on faster than any oral I've ever
done, less than 10 minutes.  First dose stoked me about six hours, will
keep you awake quiteAbit longer, tolerence develops along predictable
lines...It's more compulsive than speed,  hard to keep your hands off it,
but a low ceiling on the high itself.  Not nearly as insidious as cocaine
in this respect.  You know you've crashed the ceiling and entered the
dimReturn atticSpace, when a sort of stupifying paralysis, and vibrating,
anxious irritation set in...you can't hold a thought long enough to reason
it out, much less act on it. Typical over-stimulation response.

        I did manage to get some crytals that were white enough to slam.
The rush is pretty respectable...it starts with a numbing then... up you
go,  pretty euphoric,  a trifle nauseating for a few moments, and a little
too heavy on the heart pounding for me...Not sure, but it might croak you
as easily as coke, which is not good.  :@    Most mainline deaths, among
POPEYE's acquaintances, involved slamming coke, and he's known enough
junkies and cranksters to compare.  I don't know anyone who's bought it on
Meth in mid-rush.  Very subjective observation, perhaps, but fairly common
knowlege amongst hard-cores.
 Time flies like swift arrows.
 Speed Kills take years.
 Road Kills take note.

        Whether or not it is a threat to life as far as inducing a sudden
onset intravenously, or overdosing  with a stimulant usually depends on two
primary effects....does it increase heart rate, is it a vasoconstrictor?
If it has dramatic effects in both these areas,  like cocaine, it makes
your blood pressure go way up, and something may give,  usually in your
head, where pressures are normally highest, aka stroke, often fatal.  Your
veins and arteries constrict, the pump rate increases, pressure builds,
then _\!SPLUSH!/_  you're looking at dead relatives in some Steven
Spielburg tunnel.

        If anyone can confirm this reguarding CAT, they might post a more
educated warning or dispel this suspicion.

        By the way, don't think you're going to synthesize this, then sell
it as crank to speedfreaks,  this could be VERY dangerous to your health.
Might not be a bad cut though.

        On the brighter side, this is not a drug I've written off.  In
reasonable dosages, it's an effective mood elevater producing  a very
extroverted high, doesn't induce motor-mouth, a real party drug... sorta
makes you wanna dance. It never threatens to take you down that
mission-from-God, don't-bother-me  I-can't-stop-now Road that comes from
believing your own bullshit on a speedRun.   It goes great with beer, less
saturated fat than pretzels!

          A comparison with X might be interesting, if someone would care
to try, my limited X experience would leave me sounding stupid,  or more
stupider.

        I guess that about covers it as far as how a CAT plucks MY wires,
remember though, in all likelehood I've burned over a lot more of these
circuits than you,  a less trodden synaptic superhighway may invoke
entirely different responses, for better or worse. I have found it
impossible to include a recommended first dosage in good
conscience...please be careful, and reference other literature for this.

My guess is that MOST Cranksters would consider this little more than a
mild  plaything with annoying side effects.


                                                -POPEYE-
               Give Me Liberty
                     or
                Give Me Meth