-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Drug precursors subject to EU/UK authorisations and export licensing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Category 1

Ephedrine
Ergometrine
Ergotamine
Isosafrole
Lysergic acid
1-Phenyl-2-propanone
3,4-Methylenedioxy-phenyl-2-propanone
N-Acetylanthranilic acid
Piperonal
Pseudoephedrine
Safrole


The salts of the substances listed in this category whenever the existence of
such salts is possible.


Category 2

Acetic anhydride
Anthranilic acid
Phenylacetic acid
Piperidine

The salts of the substances listed in this category whenever the existence of
such salts is possible.


Category 3

Acetone
Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK)
Toluene
Potassium permanganate
Sulphuric acid
Hydrochloric acid


The salts of the substances listed in this category, except for sulphuric
acid and hydrochloric acid, whenever the existence of such salts is possible.

Extra-EU rules

Category 1 covers substances which are used to make synthetic drugs and which
have little or no legitimate use. Anyone wishing to import these from or export
them to outside the European Union, or wishing to be involved in transit, has to
hold a licence from the Home Office. Individual Authorisations are required for
each export operation.

Category 2 covers substances mainly used in synthetic drug production, but with
a wider legitimate use. Anyone engaged in import, export or transit of these is
required to register with the Home Office the premises from which they
manufacture or trade. Export outside the European Union is subject to
authorisation. Exporters may apply to the Home Office for an Open Individual
Export Authorisation.

Category 3 covers substances such as solvents which are used in the illicit
production of drugs like heroin and cocaine and which have a very wide
legitimate use. Operators engaged in the export of these substances are required
to register with the Home Office details of the premises from which they trade.
Export Authorisations from the Home Office are required for exports to specific
targeted countries, e.g. Colombia. This list of targeted countries is updated
from time to time. Exporters may apply to the Home Office for an Open Individual
Export Authorisation.

For further information refer to the following:

The United Kingdom's Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Act 1990
enabled the UK to implement the provisions of the 1988 Vienna convention.

The Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Act 1990 (Modification) Order
1992 brought under control an additional 10 chemicals. This was necessary to
comply with the UK's treaty obligations under the Vienna Convention and
implemented decisions taken by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in April 1992.

Council regulation (EEC) 3677/90 of 13 December 1990 laid down measures enabling
the European Union and its member states to comply with the Vienna Convention.
It was substantially amended by council regulation (EEC) 900/92 of 31 March 1992
in order to implement the recommendations of the Chemicals Action Task Force.
Commission regulation (EEC) 3769/92 of 21 December 1992 implemented the council
regulation.

Although the council and commission regulations are directly applicable in the
United Kingdom it was necessary for the UK to make additional regulations in
order to provide criminal sanctions. The 1990 council regulation was implemented
by The Controlled Drugs (Substances Useful for Manufacture) Regulations 1991.
The 1992 council regulation was implemented by The Controlled Drugs (Substances
Useful for Manufacture) (Amendment) Regulations 1993.

Intra-EU rules

The directive governing trade within the EU is enforced and implemented in the
UK by the Controlled Drugs (Substances Useful for Manufacture) (Intra-Community
Trade) Regulations 1993. This came into force on 6 October 1993.
The requirements of the directive are summarised briefly below:

Substances in categories 1 and 2 shall be documented and labelled, and documents
shall be available for declaration from the customer specifying the specific
uses of all substances.

Operators who manufacture or place on the market substances in category 1 shall
be licensed by the Home Office and shall only supply these substances to those
specifically authorised to be supplied with them.

Operators who manufacture or place on the market substances in category 2 shall
be registered with the Home Office. supply of Category 1 substances will require
an end-use declaration. This is also required for Category 2 substances if the
quantity supplied exceeds the designated threshold limit.

There are no specific controls on category 3 substances.

For further information refer to the following:-

The Controlled Drugs (Substances Useful for Manufacture) (Intra-Community)
Trade Regulations 1993, effective 6 October 1993, give effect in the UK to
EU council directive 92/109/EEC adopted by EU council, 14 December 1992,
subsequently amended by commission directive 93/46/EEC adopted by the
Commission of the European Union on 22 June 1993.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
