HI reduction of ephedrine


Get some l-ephedrine and isolate it from the goofySan and pillShit: medium
difficult
get some red phosphorous: medium difficult:medium paranoia
get some Iodine crystals: easy
  do this, and hurry up. this shit will be ILLEGAL as soon as the NARKs
read this!   OOps, y'all fucked around, and didn't read this first time,
now it's ILLEGAL, told ya.

proportions:
2 gms l-ephedrine HCl
5 mls H20
5gms I2
2.5 gms redP

don't scale it up too far without practice


  combine H2O and redP in a boiling flask in an ice bath
  slowly add I2 while holding your breath so you don't die from HI gas and
don't let the solution get too hot or you'll blow it.
  let cool
  reflux under tall cool condensors for about an hour.
  Now it's fuming hydriodic acid and RedP

  let cool to room temp, but keep condensers running

  hold your breath and keep your face clear while carefully transfering to
Stainless Steel container capable of withstanding high pressure and
corrosion resistant at seal.

  add ephedrine

  heat the motherfucker up to about 150C and keep it there for at LEAST 6 hours

  let cool

  now strain out the solid redP catalyst, use solvent to carry product
through acid resistant filtration apparatus

  pull the acid off in vaccuum, or simple distillation.  Don't just BOIL IT
OFF or you'll croak the neighbors and all the cops showing up, too.

  freebase/acidify/crystallize

  cut the sleeves off a denim jacket

  change your fucking attitude, or just indulge in excess of the product
with similar results.

  DO NOT TRY THIS unless your MC is American made or at least European.

  Begin collecting a large assortment of any sort of mechanical devices and
their parts, your front yard will do fine for this... assemble them
whenever possible into whatever you think would be a good idea at the
moment.

  Now get some threatening tatoos, grayArea firearms, and a DANGEROUS old Lady.

  Embrace VIOLENCE as the only reasonable political solution on an
interpersonal and global level

  Quit your FUCKING JOB, and DO NOT under any circumstances, TAKE ANY
SHIT!!!!!

EAT THE RICH

-POPeye

there's something else you should know:
 I don't know if any of this shit is really true or if it works, I read it
all in a book, I am actually a fourEYED computerGEEK teenAGER with a vivid
imaginashun, and no life whatSOfukingEVER.  My MOM just told me I have to
stay off the computer for the rest of the month because she found my JPEG
bestiality files stashed under <veterinary school profiles> so please don't
Emale questions about drugSynthesis or I'll be in BIG TROUBLE!!!  My buddy,
Boo-Boo is posting this for me.
 As soon as the coast is clear I'll snd out the NL
 And yes I am the guy who originally isolated bannannadine in an aluminum
foil and blowtorch apparatus, but I play this down cuz I was only 7 then
and I'm embarrased by extreme adoration.

