Worlock
Member   posted 05-24-99 11:54 PM           
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recyling the I2 
is a dream come true with this device.

In the dual push/pull cans you will have trapped the HI gas by dissolving HI into the water.

This occurs throughout most of the reaction.

When complete the dual gas/pressure regulator containes a reddish liquid strongly acidic full of HI.

Transfer the Reddish solution to a separate glass container.

By the slow addition with mild stirring of 50ml to 100 ml of 10% Sodium Hypochlorite(liquid swimming pool chlorine-2 gallons for $4.50)
Muriatic acid will not work.
the HI will initially turn brownish then violet, then the I2 will instantly precipitate leaving I2 on the bottom and a clear liquid on top.

It is an awesome site that occurs in an instant with the addition of the last few drops of chlorine. 

At this point the I2 can be filtered out of the solution, using 3-6 coffee filters.
The clear fluid contains an exceptionaly strong solution of tainted HCl acid, and should be discarded, unless you are prepared to distill it.

Wash the I2 while still in the filters with distilled water several times, this will clean out any remaining Chlorine.

The I2 is almost totally insoluble in water.
so very little is dissolved away by the wash.

Wearing gloves and saftey glasses, wring out the excess fluid from the filters then open the filters, break up the I2 ball, and allow the I2 to dry for a few minutes. 

Store the recycled Iodine in a glass or plastic sealed container safe from metal surfaces.

A very large amount of the iodine is recovered in this way. In fact almost all of it is returned for re-use 

This works because the Chlorine oxidizes the iodide to iodine while the chlorine becomes chloride.

2 half reactions
Cl2 + 2e- --> 2 Cl- 
2I- --> 2e- + I2 

can also be written as
Cl2 + 2HI --> 2HCl + I2 

The reason muriatic won't work, should be obvious, HCl is already in reduced.

A very impressive reaction at the end point, when the I2 forms in the brown-violet muck, and the solution clears with the I2 precipate on the bottom.


------------------
Worlock
villageidiot.webjump.com/index2.html 
http://www.lycaeum.org/~rhodium